MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
3.  Biochemistry Basics  | 39
3.1
3.1 THERMODYNAMICS
Thermodynamics is t he study of t he energetics of c hemical reactions. There a re t wo relevant forms of  
energy i n c hemistry: k inetic e nergy ( movement o f m olecules) a nd p otential e nergy (energy s tored i n 
chemical bonds). [What is the most important poten  tial energy storage molecule in all cells?1] The first 
law of thermodynamics, also known as the law of conservation of energy, states that the energy of the 
universe is constant. It implies that when the energy of a s ystem decreases, the energy of the rest of the 
universe (the surroundings) must increase, and vice versa. The second law of thermodynamics states 
that the disorder, or entropy, of the uni  verse tends to increase. Another way to state the second law is as 
follows: spontaneous reactions tend to increase the disorder of the universe. The symbol for entropy is S, 
and “a change in entropy” is denoted ∆S, where ∆S = Sfinal – Sinitial. [If the ∆S of a system is negative, has 
the disorder of that system increased or decreased?2]
A practical way to discuss thermodynamics is the mathematical no  tion of free energy (Gibbs free energy), 
defined by Josiah Gibbs as follows:3
Eq. 1   ∆G = ∆H – T∆S
T denotes temperature, and H denotes enthalpy, which is defined by another  equation:
Eq. 2   ∆H = ∆E + P∆V
Here E represents the bond energy of products or reactants in a s ystem, P is pressure, and V is volume. 
[Given that cellular reactions take place in the liquid phase, how is H related to E in a cell?4] ∆G increases 
with increasing ∆H (bond energy) and decreases with increasing entropy.
 • Given the second law of thermody  namics and the mathematical definition of ∆G, which reac-
tion will be favorable: one with a decrease in free energy (∆G < 0) or one with an increase in 
free energy (∆G > 0)?5
The change in the Gibbs free energy of a reaction determines whether the reaction is favorable (spontane-
ous, ∆G negative) or unfavorable (nonspontaneous, ∆G positive). In terms of the generic reaction
A + B → C + D
the Gibbs free energy change determines whether the reactants (denoted A and B) will stay as they are or 
be converted to products (C and D).
1 ATP, which stores energy in the ester bonds between its phosphate groups.
2 If ∆S is negative, then the system lost entropy, which means that disorder decreased.
3 As in ∆S, the Greek letter ∆ (delta) indicates “the change in.” For example, ∆Grxn = Gproducts – Greactants.
4 H ≈ E, since the change in volume is negligible (∆V ≈ 0).
5 Favorable reactions have ∆G < 0 . We can deduce this from the second law and Equation 1 b ecause the second law states that increasing 
entropy is favorable, and the equation has ∆G directly related to –T∆S.

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
40 | For More Free Content, visit PrincetonReview.com
3.1
Spontaneous reactions, ones that occur without a net addition of energy, have ∆G < 0. They occur with 
energy to spare. Reactions with a n egative ∆G are exergonic (energy exits the system); reactions with a 
positive ∆G a re endergonic. Endergonic reac  tions occur only if energy is added. In t he lab, energy is 
added in the form of heat; in the body, endergonic reactions are driven by reaction coupling to exergonic 
reactions (more on this later). Reactions with a negative ∆H are called exothermic and liberate heat. Most 
metabolic reactions are exothermic (which is how homeothermic organisms such as mammals maintain 
a constant body temperature). Reactions with a positive ∆H require an input of heat and are referred to 
as endothermic. (Thermodynamics will be discussed in more detail in MCAT General Chemistry Review 
and MCAT Physics and Math Review.)
The signs of t hermodynamic quantities a re a ssigned f rom t he p oint of v iew of the sy stem, not t he sur-
roundings or the universe. Thus, a negative ∆G means that the system goes to a lower free energy state, 
and a system will always move in the direction of the lowest free energy. As an analogy, visualize a spin-
ning top as the system. What happens to the top? Does it spin faster and faster? No. It moves toward the 
lowest energy state. Let’s expand the analogy, using an equation:
motionless top  →  spinning top
Here the “reactant” is the motionless top, and the “product” is the spinning top. Which is lower: the free 
energy of product or reactant? The reactant. Is the reaction “spontaneous” as written? No; in fact, the 
reverse reaction is spontaneous. Therefore, 
Gspinning > Gmotionless
and thus,
∆Greaction as written (motionless to spinning; left to right) > 0
So t he reaction is nonspontaneous. In other words, it requires energy input, namely, en  ergy f rom your 
muscles as you spin the top. [If the products in a reaction have more entropy than the reactants and the 
enthalpy (H) of the reactants and the products are the same, can the reac  tion occur spontaneously?6]
The value of ∆G depends on the concentrations of reactants and products, which can be variable in the 
body. Therefore, to compare reactions, chemists calculate a s tandard free energy change, denoted ∆G°, 
with all reactants and products present at 1 M concentration. Under physiological conditions, however, 
the hydrogen ion concentration is far from 1 M, so biochemists use an even more standardized ∆G, with 
1 M concentration for all solutes except H+ and a pH of 7; this is denoted ∆G°′. 
∆G°′ is related to the equilibrium constant for a reaction by the following  equation:
Eq. 3  Δ GR TK°ʹ=− ʹln eq
6 Yes. If ∆S > 0 and ∆H = 0, then according to the second law of thermodynamics, the reaction is spontaneous; see Equation 1.

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
3.  Biochemistry Basics  | 41
3.1
where R is the gas constant (which would be given on the MCAT, along with the entire equation), and 
K ′eq is the ratio of products to reactants at equilibrium:
ʹ =K eq
eq eq
eq eq
C] D]
A] B]
[[
[[
K ′eq is the ratio of products to reactants when enough time has passed for equilibrium to be reached.
[When K ′eq = 1, what is ∆G°′?7]
But what if we wanted to calculate ∆G for a reaction in the body? In this case, we need one more equation:
Eq. 4  ∆∆GG RT QQ=+ =°′ ln , [where C][D]
[A][B]
Here, Q is calculated using the actual concentrations of A, B, C, and D (for example, the concentrations 
in the cell). Equation 4 is simply a conversion from ∆G°′ (the laboratory standard ∆G with initial concen-
trations at 1 M) to the real-life here-and-now ∆G. Note that if we put 1 M concentrations of A, B, C, and 
D into a b eaker (at pH 7), we have recreated the laboratory standard initial set-up: Q = 1, so ln Q = 0, 
which means ∆G = ∆G°′.
Remember that Q and Keq are not the same. Q is the ratio of products to reactants in any given set-up; 
Keq is the ratio at equilibrium. Equilibrium is defined as the point at which the rate of reaction in the 
forward direction equals the rate of reaction in the reverse direction. At equilibrium, there is constant 
product and reactant turnover as reactants form products and vice versa, but overall concentra  tions stay 
the same.  Theoretically (given enough time), all reactant/product systems in a closed system will eventu-
ally reach this point.
While all reactions will eventually reach an equilibrium defined by the constant above, we can disturb 
this balance with the addition or removal of a r eactant or product. This causes a c hange in Q but not 
Keq, and the reaction will proceed in the direction necessary to reestablish equilibrium. (The shift to re-
store equilibrium is a demonstration of Le Châtelier’s principle which will be discussed in further detail 
in MCAT General Chemistry Review.) Using this principle, a r eaction which favors reactants at equilib-
rium can be driven to generate additional products (such strategies are employed frequently in cellular  
respiration).
 • You are studying a particular reaction. You find the reaction in a book and read ∆G°′ from 
a table. Can you calculate ∆G for this reaction in a living human being without any more 
information?8
7 Equation 3 says that ∆G°′ = 0 when K′eq = 1 since ln 1 = 0. Note: for more information about MCAT Math, see MCAT Physics and Math 
Review. 
8 No. You need to know the concentrations of A , B, C, and D i n the human cell. For example, ΔG°′ might be +14.8 kcal/mol, indicating 
that the reaction is very unfavorable under standard conditions and has a K < 1, which means that at equilibrium there are more reactants 
than products. If, however, the ratio of reactants to products is made to be higher than that established at equilibrium, the Q for the reac-
tion becomes less than K, and the forward reaction is spontaneous under these conditions, since ΔG will be less than zero (even though 
ΔG°′ will not change). The significance of Q as an independent variable in Equation 4 is that it accounts for Le Châtelier’s principle. If a 
system at equilibrium has reactants added to it, Q < K and ΔG < 0, so the high concentration of reactants will drive the reaction forward to  
reestablish equilibrium. If a system at equilibrium has products added to it, Q > K and ΔG > 0, so the high concentration of products will 
drive the reaction backward to reestablish equilibrium. All reactions at equilibrium will respond to these stresses in the same way, regard-
less of the sign of their ΔG°′.

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
42 | For More Free Content, visit PrincetonReview.com
3.1
 • How can ∆G be negative if ∆G°′ is positive (which indicates that the reaction is unfavorable at 
standard conditions)?9
 • Does Keq indicate the rate at which a reaction will proceed?10
 • When Keq is large, which has lower free energy: products or  reactants?11
 • When Q is large, which has lower free energy: products or reactants?12
 • Which direction, forward or backward, will be favored in a reaction if ∆G = 0? (Hint: What 
does Equation 4 look like when ∆G = 0?)13
 • Radiolabeled chemicals are often used to trace constituents in biochemical reactions. The  
following reaction with ∆G = 0 is in aqueous solution:
AB C     BC
A += , [] []
[]K eq
  A small amount of radiolabeled B is added to the solution. After a period of time, where will 
the radiolabel most likely be found: in A, in B, or in both?14
In summary, then, there are two factors that determine whether a reaction will occur spontaneously (∆G 
negative) in the cell:
 1)  The intrinsic properties of the reactants and products (Keq)
 2)  The concentrations of reactants and products (RT ln Q)
(In the lab, there is third factor: temperature. If ln Q is negative and the temperature is high enough, ∆G 
will be negative, regardless of the value of ∆G°′.)
9 The reaction may be favorable (∆G < 0) if the ratio of the concentrations of reactants to products is sufficiently large to drive the reaction 
forward (that is, if RT ln Q is more negative than ∆G°′ is positive, which would make their sum (which, by Equation 4, is ∆G) negative).
10 Keq indicates only the relative concentrations of reagents once equilibrium is reached, not the reaction rate (how fast equilibrium is reached). 
11 A large Keq means that more products are present at equilibrium. Remember that equilibrium tends toward the lowest energy state. Hence, 
when Keq is large, products have lower free energy than reactants.
12 The size of Q says nothing about the properties of the reactants and products. Q is calculated from whatever the initial concentrations hap-
pen to be. It is Keq that says something about the nature of reactants and products, since it describes their concentrations after equilibrium 
has been reached.
13 If ∆G is 0, then neither the forward nor the reverse reaction is favored. Look at Equations 3 a nd 4. Note that when ∆G = 0, Equation 4 
reduces to Equation 3, and thus Q = Keq (which means Q at this moment is the same as Keq, measured after the reaction system is allowed 
to reach equilibrium). When Q = Keq, we are by definition at equilibrium. Understand and memorize the following: when ∆G = 0, you are 
at equilibrium; forward reaction rate equals back reaction rate, and the net concentrations of reactants and products do not change.
14 The reaction is in dynamic equilibrium where reactions are occurring in both directions, but at an equal rate. Because ∆G = 0, we know 
that the forward reaction and the reverse reaction proceed at equal rates, even though we don’t know the actual value. Therefore, after a 
period of time, the radiolabel will be present in both A and B.

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
3.  Biochemistry Basics  | 43
3.2
Thermodynamics vs. Reaction Rates
The term spontaneous is used to describe a r eaction system with ∆G < 0 . This can be misleading, since 
the common usage of the word spontaneous has a connotation of rapid rate; this is not what spontaneous 
means in the context of chemical reactions. For example, many reactions have a negative ∆G, indicating 
that they are “spontaneous” from a thermodynamic point of view, but they do not necessarily occur at a 
significant rate. Spontaneous means that a reaction is energetically favorable, but it says nothing about the 
rate of reaction.
Thermodynamics will tell you where a system starts and finishes but nothing about the path traveled to 
get there. The difference in free energy in a reaction is only a function of the nature of the reac  tants and 
products. Thus, ∆G does not depend on the pathway a reaction takes or the rate of reaction; it is only a 
measurement of the difference in free energy between reactants and products.
3.2 KINETICS AND ACTIVATION ENERGY (EA)
The reason some spontaneous (i.e., thermodynamically favorable) reactions proceed very slowly or not at 
all is that a large amount of energy is required to get them going. For example, the burning of wood is 
spontaneous, but you can stare at a log all day and it won’t burn. Some energy (heat) must be provided to 
kick-start the process.
The study of reaction rates is called chemical kinetics. All reactions proceed through a transition state 
(TS) that is unstable and takes a great deal of energy to produce. The transition state exists for a very, very 
short time, either moving forward to form products or breaking back down into reactants. The energy 
required to produce the transition state is called the activation energy (Ea). This is the barrier that pre-
vents many reactions from proceeding even though the ∆G for the reaction may be negative. The match 
you use to light your fireplace provides the activation energy for the reaction known as burning. It is the 
activation energy barrier that determines the kinetics of a reaction. [How would the rate of a spontaneous 
re  action be affected if the activation energy were lowered?15]
The concept of Ea is key to understanding the role of enzymes, so let’s spend some time on it. To illustrate, 
take this reaction:
Bobwithout a job  +  job  →  Bobwith a job
Is this a favorable reaction, i.e., will the universe be better off, with less total (nervous) en  ergy, if Bob gets 
the job? Will things settle down? Let’s assume yes. However, between the two states (without/with), there 
is a temporary state, namely, Bobapplying for job. So the reaction will look this way:
Bobwithout a job + job  →  [Bobapplying for job]‡  →  Bobwith a job
15 The rate would be increased, since lowering Ea is tantamount to reducing the energy required to achieve the transition state. The more tran-
sition state products that are formed, the greater the amount of product produced, i.e., the more rapid the rate of reaction.

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
44 | For More Free Content, visit PrincetonReview.com
3.2
The middle term is the transition state, traditionally written in square brackets with a double-cross sym-
bol: [TS]‡. The energy required for Bob to be job hunting is much higher than the energy of Bob with a 
job or Bob without a job. As a result, he may not go job hunting, even though he’d be happier in the long 
run if he did. In this model, we can describe the Ea as the energy necessary to get Bob to apply for a job.
A catalyst lowers the Ea of a reaction without changing the ∆G. The catalyst lowers the Ea by stabilizing 
the transition state, making its existence less thermodynamically unfavorable. The second important char-
acteristic of a catalyst is that it is not consumed in the reaction; it is regenerated with each reaction cycle.
In our model, an example of a catalyst would be a career planning service (CPS). Adding a CPS won’t 
make Bobwithout a job any happier or sadder, nor will it make Bobwith a job happier or sadder. But it will make 
it much easier for Bob to move between the two states: without a job versus with a job. The traditional 
way to represent a reaction system like this is using a reaction coordinate graph, as shown in Figure 1. This 
is just a way to look at the energy of the reaction system as compared to the three possible states of the 
system: 1) re  actants, 2) [TS]‡, and 3) products. The x-axis plots the physical progress of the reaction sys -
tem (the “reaction coordinate”), and the y-axis plots energy.
R eaction coordinate
[TS]‡
Ea without catalyst
Ea with catalyst
∆ Greactants
products
•
•
 Free Energy
Figure 1 The reaction coordinate graph
Enzymes are biological catalysts. They increase the rate of a reaction by lowering the reaction’s activation 
energy, but they do not affect ∆G between reactants and products. As catalysts, enzymes have a k inetic 
role, not a t hermodynamic one. [ Will an enzyme alter the concentra  tion of reagents at equilibrium?16] 
Enzymes may alter the rate of a reaction enormously: a reaction that would take a hundred years to reach 
equilibrium w ithout a n enzyme may occur in just seconds w ith a n enzyme. More information on en-
zymes can be found in Chapter 4.
16 No. It will affect only the rate at which the reactants and products reach equilibrium.

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
3.  Biochemistry Basics  | 45
3.3
3.3 OXIDATION AND REDUCTION
Energy Metabolism and the Definitions of Oxidation and Reduction
Where does the energy in foods come from? How do we make use of this energy? Why do we breathe? 
The answers begin with photosynthesis, the process by which plants store energy from the sun in the 
bond energy of carbohydrates. Plants are photoau  totrophs because they use energy from light (“photo”) 
to make their own (“auto”) food. We are chemoheterotrophs, because we use the energy of chemicals 
(“chemo”) produced by other (“hetero”) living things, namely plants and other animals. Plants and ani-
mals store chemical energy in reduced molecules such as carbohydrates and fats. These reduced molecules 
are oxidized to produce CO2 and ATP. The energy of ATP is used in turn to drive the energetically unfa-
vorable reactions of the cell. That’s the basic energetics of life; all the rest is detail.
In essence, the production and utilization of energy boil down to a series of oxidation/reduction reactions. 
Oxidation is a chemical term meaning the loss of electrons. Reduction means the opposite, the gain of 
electrons. Molecules can gain or lose electrons depending on the other atoms that they are bound to. There 
are three common ways to identify oxidation/reduction reactions on the MCAT, and it is important for 
you to know them:
Recognizing Oxidation Reactions:
 1)  gain of oxygen atoms
 2)  loss of hydrogen atoms
 3)  loss of electrons
Recognizing Reduction Reactions (just the opposite):
 1)  loss of oxygen atoms
 2)  gain of hydrogen atoms
 3)  gain of electrons
Though you should memorize this, it is not a subject worthy of philosophizing. If you can answer ques-
tions l ike t he f ollowing, you’re s et: i s c hanging C H3CH3 to H 2C=CH2 a n oxidation, a r eduction, or 
neither?17 What about changing Fe3+ to Fe2+?18 What about this: O2 → H2O?19 
17 It’s an oxidation, because hydrogens have been removed.
18 It’s a reduction, because an electron has been added.
19 It’s a reduction, because hydrogens have been added to the oxygen molecule.

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
46 | For More Free Content, visit PrincetonReview.com
3.3
You can also identify oxidation/reduction reactions visually by looking at the structure of the molecules. 
Is the formation of a disulfide bond (Figure 2) an oxidation or a reduction reaction?20
O
OH
HS
H
H
N
N
H
H
HS
OH
O
O
OH
S
H
H
N
N
H
H
S
OH
O
disul/f_ide bond
Figure 2 Formation of a disulfide bond
Here is one other important fact about oxi  dation and reduction: when one atom gets reduced, another 
one must be oxidized; hence the term redox pair. As you study the process of glucose oxidation, you will 
see that each time an oxidation reaction occurs, a reduction reaction occurs too. 
Catabolism is the process of breaking down molecules. The opposite is an  abolism, which is “building-
up” metabolism.21 For example, the way we extract energy from glucose is by oxidative catabolism. We 
break down the glucose by oxidizing it. The stoichiometry of glucose oxidation looks like this:
C6H12O6 + 6 O2  →   6 CO2 + 6 H2O
 • What are the two members of the redox pair in this reaction?22
As we oxidize foods, we release the stored energy plants received from the sun. But we don’t make use of 
that energy right away. Instead, we store it in the form of ATP. Alternatively, we can use the energy in 
ATP to generate storage molecules such as glycogen and fatty acids. Fatty acids are generated by succes-
sive reductions of a carbon chain, thus anabolic processes are generally reductive. 
20 It’s an oxidation, because hydrogens have been removed.
21 The mnemonics are cata = breakdown, as in catastrophe, and ana = buildup, sounds like “add-a.” (Think of anabolic steroids, which weight-
lifters use to bulk up.)
22 The carbons in the sugar are oxidized (to CO2), and oxygen is reduced (to H2O).

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
3.  Biochemistry Basics  | 47
3.4
3.4 ACIDS AND BASES
There are two important definitions of acids and bases you should be familiar with for biochemistry on 
the MCAT. 
Brønsted-Lowry Acids and Bases
Brønsted and Lowry offered the following definitions:
Acids are proton (H+) donors.
Bases are proton (H+) acceptors.
While the often-seen hydroxide ions qualify a s Brønsted-Lowry ba ses, many other compounds fit this 
definition as well. Since a Brønsted-Lowry base is any substance that is capable of accepting a proton, any 
anion or any neutral species with a lone pair of electrons can function as a base. 
If we consider the reversible reaction below:
H2CO3 + H2O     H3O+ + HCO3
–
then according to the Brønsted-Lowry definition, H2CO3 and H3O+ are acids and HCO3
– and H2O are 
bases. The Brønsted-Lowry definition of acids and bases is the most important one for the MCAT.
Lewis Acids and Bases
Lewis’s definitions of acids and bases are broader:
Lewis acids are electron-pair acceptors.
Lewis bases are electron-pair donors.
If we consider the reversible reaction below:
AlCl3 + H2O     (AlCl3OH)− + H+
then according to the Lewis definition, AlCl3 and H+ are acids because they accept electron pairs; H2O and 
(AlCl3OH)– are bases because they donate electron pairs. Lewis acid/base reactions frequently result in the 
formation of coordinate covalent bonds. For example, in the reaction above, water acts as a Lewis base, since 
it donates both of the electrons involved in the coordinate covalent bond between OH– and AlCl3. AlCl3 
acts as a Lewis acid, since it accepts the electrons involved in this bond.
Cl Al + + Η+
–
→O
H H
Cl
Cl
Cl Al Cl
Cl
OH

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
48 | For More Free Content, visit PrincetonReview.com
3.4
The binding of an oxygen molecule to the iron atom in a heme group is a g reat biological example of a 
coordinate covalent bond formed between a Lewis acid and base:
Fe+2
N
N N
N
O
O
-OOC COO-
Figure 3 Example of a coordinate covalent bond
 • Is oxygen the Lewis acid or Lewis base in the heme group?23
Conjugate Acids and Bases
When a Brønsted-Lowry acid donates an H+, the remaining structure is called the conjugate base of the 
acid. Likewise, when a Brønsted-Lowry base bonds with an H+ in solution, this new species is called the 
conjugate acid of the base. To illustrate these definitions, consider this reaction:
NH3 + H2ON H4
+
 + OH–
acid–base conjugates
acid–base conjugates
⇋
23 Oxygen is donating a pair of electrons to the Fe2+ ion and is therefore the Lewis base. 

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
3.  Biochemistry Basics  | 49
3.4
Considering only t he forward d irection, N H3 i s t he ba se a nd H 2O i s t he acid. Th e products a re t he 
conjugate acid and conjugate base of the reactants: NH4
+ is the conjugate acid of NH3, and OH– is the 
conjugate base of H2O:
NH3 + H2ON H4
+
 + OH–
conjugate
base
conjugate
acid
acid
base
⇋
Now consider the reverse reaction in which NH4
+ is the acid and OH– is the base. The conjugates are the 
same as for the forward reaction: NH3 is the conjugate base of NH4
+, and H2O is the conjugate acid of 
OH–:
NH3 + H2ON H4
+
 + OH–
conjugate
base
conjugate
acid
acid
base
⇋
The difference between a B rønsted-Lowry acid and its conjugate base is that the base is missing an H+. 
The difference between a Brønsted-Lowry base and its conjugate acid is that the acid has an extra H+.
forming conjugates:
acid
– H+
+ H+
base⇋
The Strengths of Acids and Bases
If we use HA to denote a generic acid, its dissociation in water has the form
HA(aq) + H2O(l)   H3O+(aq) + A–(aq)
The strength of the acid is directly related to how much the products are favored over the reactants. The 
equilibrium expression for this reaction is
K a
3
+HO ][A
HA]= []
[
−

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
50 | For More Free Content, visit PrincetonReview.com
3.4
This is written as Ka, rather than Keq, to emphasize that this is the equilibrium expression for an acid-
dissociation reaction. In fact, Ka is known as the acid-ionization (or acid-dissociation) constant of the 
acid (HA). We can rank the relative strengths of acids by comparing their Ka values: the larger the Ka 
value, the stronger the acid; the smaller the Ka value, the weaker the acid. 
 • Of the following acids, which one would dissociate to the greatest extent (in water)?24
 A) HCN (hydrocyanic acid), Ka = 6.2 × 10–10
 B) HNCO (cyanic acid), Ka = 3.3 × 10–4
  C) HClO (hypochlorous acid), Ka = 2.9 × 10–8
  D) HBrO (hypobromous acid), Ka = 2.2 × 10–9
We can apply the same ideas as above to identify the strength of bases. If we use B to denote a generic base, 
its dissolution in water has the form
B(aq) + H2O(l)   HB+(aq) + OH–(aq)
Similar to acids, the strength of the base is directly related to how much the products are favored over the 
reactants. If we write the equilibrium constant for this reaction, we get:
K b
+HB ][OH
B]= []
[
−
This i s w ritten a s Kb, r ather t han Keq, to emphasize t hat t his i s t he e quilibrium e xpression for a base- 
dissociation reaction. In fact, Kb is known as the base-ionization (or base-dissociation) constant. We 
can rank the relative strengths of bases by comparing their Kb values: the larger the Kb value, the stronger 
the base; the smaller the Kb value, the weaker the base. 
Amphoteric Substances
Take a look at the dissociation of carbonic acid (H2CO3), a weak acid:
H2CO3(aq) + H2O(l)   H3O+(aq) + HCO3
–(aq)     (Ka = 4.5 × 10–7)
The conjugate base of carbonic acid is HCO3
–, which also has an ionizable proton. Carbonic acid is said 
to be polyprotic, because it has more than one proton to donate.
24 B. The acid that would dissociate to the greatest extent would have the greatest Ka value. Of the choices given, HNCO (choice B) has the 
greatest Ka value.

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
3.  Biochemistry Basics  | 51
3.4
Let’s look at how the conjugate base of carbonic acid dissociates:
HCO3
–(aq) + H2O(l)   H3O+(aq) + CO3
2−(aq)    (Ka = 4.8 × 10–11)
In the first reaction, HCO3
– acts as a ba se, but in the second reaction, it acts as an acid. W henever a 
substance can act as either an acid or a base, we say that it is amphoteric. The conjugate base of a weak 
polyprotic acid is always amphoteric, because it can either donate or accept another proton. Also notice 
that HCO3
– is a weaker acid than H2CO3; in general, every time a polyprotic acid donates a proton, the 
resulting species will be a weaker acid than its predecessor. Amino acids, which will be discussed in more 
detail in the next chapter, are all also amphoteric compounds and very important for the MCAT.
pH 
The pH scale measures the concentration of H+ (or H3O+) ions in a solution. Because the molarity of H+ 
tends to be quite small and can vary over many orders of magnitude, the pH scale is logarithmic:
pH = −log[H+]
This formula implies that [H+] = 10–pH. Since [H+] = 10–7 M in pure water, the pH of water is 7. At 25°C, 
this defines a pH neutral solution. If [H+] is greater than 10–7 M, then the pH will be less than 7, and the 
solution is said to be acidic. If [H+] is less than 10–7 M, the pH will be greater than 7, and the solution is 
basic (or alkaline). Notice that a low pH means a high [H+] and the solution is acidic; a high pH means a 
low [H+] and the solution is basic.
pH > 7 basic solution
pH = 7 neutral solution
pH < 7 acidic solution
The range of the pH scale for most solutions falls between 0 and 14, but some strong acids and bases ex-
tend the scale past this range. For example, a 10 M solution of HCl will fully dissociate into H+ and Cl–. 
Therefore, the [H+] = 10 M, and the pH = −1.
An alternate measurement expresses the acidity or basicity in terms of the hydroxide ion concentration, 
[OH−], by using pOH. The same formula applies for hydroxide ions as for hydrogen ions.
pOH = −log[OH–]
This formula implies that [OH–] = 10–pOH.
Acids and bases are inversely related: the greater the concentration of H+ ions, the lower the concentration 
of OH– ions, and vice versa. Since [H+][OH–] = 10–14 at 25°C, the values of pH and pOH satisfy a special 
relationship at 25°C: 
pH + pOH = 14
So, if you know the pOH of a solution, you can find the pH, and vice versa. For example, if the pH of a 
solution is 5, then the pOH must be 9. If the pOH of a solution is 2, then the pH must be 12. 

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
52 | For More Free Content, visit PrincetonReview.com
3.4
Relationships Between Conjugates
pKa and pKb
The definitions of pH and pOH both involve a negative logarithm. In general, “p” of something is equal 
to the –log of that something. Therefore, the following definitions won’t be surprising:
pKa = −log Ka
pKb = −log Kb
Because H+ concentrations are generally very small and can vary over such a wide range, the pH scale gives 
us more convenient numbers to work with. The same is true for pKa and pKb. Remember that the larger 
the Ka value, the stronger the acid. Since “p” means “take the negative log of…,” the lower the pKa value, 
the stronger the acid. For example, lactic acid has a Ka of 1.3 × 10–4, and uric acid has a Ka of 2.5 × 10–6.  
Since the Ka of lactic acid is larger than that of uric acid, more molecules of lactic acid than uric acid will 
dissociate into ions in aqueous solution. In other words, lactic acid is stronger than uric acid. The pKa of 
lactic acid is 3.9, and the pKa of uric acid is 5.6. The acid with the lower pKa value is the stronger acid. 
The same logic applies to pKb: the lower the pKb value, the stronger the base. Memorize this!
 • Of the following liquids, which one contains the lowest concentration of H3O+ ions?25
 A) Lemon juice (pH = 2.3)
 B) Blood (pH = 7.4) 
 C) Seawater (pH = 8.5)
 D) Coffee (pH = 5.1)
 • Which of the following compounds is the least acidic?26
 A) CH3COOH, acetic acid (pKa = 4.76)
 B) H2CO3, carbonic acid (pKa = 6.35)
 C) H3PO4, phosphoric acid (pKa = 2.15)
  D) HCO3
–, bicarbonate (pKa = 10.33)
25 C. Since pH = – log [H3O+], we know that [H3O+] = 1/10 pH. This fraction is smallest when the pH is greatest. Of the choices given, sea-
water has the highest pH.
26 D. The compound with the highest pKa is the least acidic. Bicarbonate has the highest pKa of all the answer choices.

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
3.  Biochemistry Basics  | 53
3.4
Buffer Solutions
A buffer i s a s olution t hat r esists c hanging p H w hen a s mall a mount o f a cid o r ba se i s a dded. Th e  
buffering capacity comes from the presence of a weak acid and its conjugate base (or a weak base and its 
conjugate acid) in roughly equal concentrations.
Buffers a re e xtremely i mportant b ecause n early e very b iological p rocess i n t he h uman b ody i s p H- 
dependent. The H+ ion commonly functions as a reactant, product, or catalyst in chemical reactions in 
metabolic pathways. In addition, there are many sources of acids and bases in the body that can cause 
significant changes in the pH if it weren’t for our buffer systems. 
The most important buffer system in our blood plasma (and for the MCAT) is the bicarbonate buffer sys-
tem. This buffer consists of carbonic acid (H2CO3) and its conjugate base, bicarbonate (HCO3
–):
Reaction 1    H2CO3 → H+ + HCO3
–
This buffer system is particularly complex because of how carbonic acid is formed in the body. During 
cellular respiration, an activity that is constantly occurring in our body, our cells produce carbon dioxide 
(CO2) as a byproduct. The carbon dioxide can then react in a reversible fashion with water to form car-
bonic acid:
Reaction 2    CO2 + H2O → H2CO3
To understand how this buffer system works, we can consider the following scenario. Let’s say you go on 
a run, causing your muscle tissue to produce lactic acid. The lactic acid would seek to increase the con-
centration of H+ ions in your body and thus decrease the pH. As discussed earlier, a drop in pH is prob-
lematic; it can severely impact our metabolic processes. However, when the lactic acid produces H+ ions,  
Reaction 1 shifts to the left by Le Châtelier’s principle, reducing the amount of free H+ ions. While this 
shift does not completely prevent the pH from falling, it significantly reduces the degree to which the pH 
falls.

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
54 | For More Free Content, visit PrincetonReview.com
MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW54 | For More Free Content, visit PrincetonReview.com
Chapter 3 Summary
 • ∆G, t he Gi bbs free e nergy, i s the a mount o f e nergy in a reaction available t o do 
chemical work. 
 • For a reaction under any set of conditions, ∆G = ∆H −T∆S.
 • If ∆G < 0 , t he r eaction i s s pontaneous i n t he f orward d irection. I f ∆G > 0 , t he  
reaction is nonspontaneous in the forward direction. If ∆G = 0, the reaction is at 
equilibrium. 
 • Kinetics is the study of how quickly a r eaction occurs, but it does not determine 
whether or not a reaction will occur.
 • Activation ener gy ( Ea) i s t he m inimum e nergy r equired t o s tart a r eaction a nd  
decreases in the presence of a catalyst, thereby increasing the reaction rate.
 • Acids are proton donors and electron acceptors; bases are proton acceptors and 
electron donors. 
 • The higher the Ka (lower the pKa), the stronger the acid. The higher the Kb (lower 
the pKb), the stronger the base. 
 • Amphoteric substances may act as either acids or bases. 
 • pH = −log[H+]. For a concentration of H+ given in a 10−x M notation, simply take the 
negative exponent to find the pH. T he same is true for the relationship between 
[OH−] and pOH, Ka and pKa, and Kb and pKb.
 • Buffers resist pH change upon the addition of a small amount of acid or base. The 
key buffer system in the body is the bicarbonate buffer system.

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
3.  Biochemistry Basics  | 55
Drill
CHAPTER 3 FREESTANDING PRACTICE QUESTIONS
 1.  Which of the following best describes the function of 
enzymes?
A. By decreasing the Ea, enzymes increase both 
the reaction rate and the total amount of product 
formed.
B. By making the ∆G of the reaction more negative, 
enzymes increase the amount of product formed per 
unit time.
C. By decreasing the energy of the transition state, 
enzymes increase the amount of product formed per 
unit time.
D. By making the ∆G of the reaction more positive, 
enzymes increase the total amount of product 
formed.
 2.  Malate dehydrogenase is a key enzyme in TCA cycle, 
which catalyzes the following reaction, which is 
unfavorable under standard conditions: 
C4H6O5 + NAD+ → C4H4O5 + NADH + H+
  Which of the following corresponds to the compound 
that is most likely to be oxidized under standard 
conditions? 
A. C4H6O5
B. NAD+
C. C4H4O5
D. NADH
 3.  All of the following are examples of oxidation-reduction 
reactions EXCEPT:
 I. C3H7O6P + NAD+ + Pi → C3H8O10P2 + NADH + H+
 II.  C6H12O6 + 6 O2 → 6 CO2 + 6 H2O
 III.  C6H14O12P2 → 2 C3H7O6P
A. II only
B. III only
C. I and II only 
D. I and III only
 4.  An acidic Glu residue in a protein (neutral in its 
protonated form) has a pKa value of 2.3 in the wild-type 
protein and is found near a neutral Ile residue. What will 
be the effect on the pKa of the Glu residue if a mutation 
substitutes a positively charged Lys residue for the Ile 
residue? 
A. The pKa will decrease due to favorable ionic 
interactions between the deprotonated Glu and Lys 
residues. 
B. The pKa will decrease due to unfavorable ionic 
interactions between the deprotonated Glu and Lys 
residues.
C. The pKa will increase due to favorable ionic 
interactions between the deprotonated Glu and Lys 
residues.
D. The pKa will increase due to unfavorable ionic 
interactions between the deprotonated Glu and Lys 
residues.
 5.  Which of the following best orders the relative basicity 
of the side chains of Glu (pKa = 4.1), Cys (pKa = 8.3), 
and Lys (pKa = 10.8)?
A. Cys > Glu > Lys
B. Lys > Glu > Cys
C. Lys > Cys > Glu
D. Glu > Cys > Lys
 6.  The cells in your body are constantly undergoing cellular 
respiration, producing CO2 as a byproduct. What would 
happen to the pH of your blood if you were to hold your 
breath?
A. It would increase.
B. It would be the same.
C. It would decrease. 
D. It cannot be determined with the information 
provided.

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
56 | For More Free Content, visit PrincetonReview.com
3.1 Drill
CHAPTER 3 PRACTICE PASSAGE
The complexity of hemoglobin’s function is exemplified by its 
chemical structure. Multiple factors are believed to affect the 
kinetics of oxygen binding to the molecule’s active sites.  
It has been proposed that the binding of oxygen (Figure 1)  
reduces strain on the heme protein superstructure by 
counterbalancing the pull of the proximal imidazole. Similarly, 
increasing basicity of the proximal imidazole (e.g., through 
loss of a hydrogen atom) is believed to exert additional strain 
on the heme protein in the deoxygenated state by inducing 
a dome-shaped molecular structure. Because the binding of 
oxygen relieves this strain, increasing basicity of the proximal 
imidazole increases the affinity of the heme for oxygen. The 
hydrophobic pocket created by hydrocarbon-like residues from 
adjacent heme proteins is also believed to facilitate oxygenation, 
though it has been proposed steric hindrance may provide an 
antagonistic effect. The distal imidazole shown below may 
inhibit dissociation by stabilizing the oxygen molecule in place. 
B:
H
H
H
R
R
R
R
N
N CH3
proximal
imidazole
hydrophobic
pocket
distal
imidazole
CH3
CH3
CC
C
C C
C C
C
C C
CC
C
CC C
HC
CH
CH
CH
O
Oδ
Fe
CH3
N
N
N
N
N
N
–
Figure 1 Summary schematic of selected stereoelectronic 
factors in oxygen affinity of heme
The net effect of these and other factors affecting oxygen 
dissociation from hemoglobin can be expressed kinetically:
  Equation 1    Heme + O2      Heme-O2
k9
k
A single heme molecule will associate with O2 to form a 
heme-O2 complex with rate constant k9; in a reverse reaction, 
oxygen will dissociate from the heme-O2 complex with rate 
constant k. One study examined the kinetics of association 
of oxygen at different oxygen-bound states as well as the 
implied equilibrium constants (KO2) for each stage of oxygen 
association (Table 1).
Table 1 Kinetic Data Pertaining To Oxygen  
Association With Hemoglobin
Heme k9  
(M–1 sec–1 × 10–7) k (sec–1) K9O2  
(M–1 × 10–6)
Hb 0.20 1079 0.0019
Hb(O2) 0.39 245 0.016
Hb(O2)2 0.35 30 0.12
Hb(O2)3 4.00 47 0.85
Adapted from Chang, C. K., and Traylor, T. G. Kinetics of oxygen and 
carbon monoxide binding to synthetic analogs of the myoglobin and 
hemoglobin active sites; Ip, S. H. C.
 1. Based on information presented in the passage, which 
of the following most likely describes the outcome of 
replacing the distal imidazole with a nonpolar amino 
acid residue?
A. The bond between iron and oxygen would be 
stabilized, decreasing the rate at which oxygen 
dissociates from hemoglobin.
B. The bond between iron and oxygen would be 
stabilized, increasing the rate at which oxygen 
dissociates from hemoglobin.
C. The bond between iron and oxygen would be 
destabilized, decreasing the rate at which oxygen 
dissociates from hemoglobin.
D. The bond between iron and oxygen would be 
destabilized, increasing the rate at which oxygen 
dissociates from hemoglobin.
 2. Which of the following amino acids would likely NOT 
be found in the hydrophobic pocket of hemoglobin?
A. F
B. Y
C. L
D. V

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
3.  Biochemistry Basics  | 57
Drill
 3. What is the most likely effect of the addition of acid to 
the solution in which hemoglobin is suspended? 
A. The structure of deoxyhemoglobin would become 
relatively less strained, reducing affinity for oxygen.
B. The structure of deoxyhemoglobin would become 
relatively less strained, increasing affinity for 
oxygen.
C. The structure of deoxyhemoglobin would become 
relatively more strained, reducing affinity for 
oxygen.
D. The structure of deoxyhemoglobin would become 
relatively more strained, increasing affinity for 
oxygen.
 4. Which of the following would be most likely to bind 
oxygen the fastest in the pulmonary vasculature?
A. Hb
B. Hb(O2) 
C. Hb(O2)2 
D. Hb(O2)3 

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
58 | For More Free Content, visit PrincetonReview.com
SOLUTIONS TO CHAPTER 3 FREESTANDING PRACTICE 
 QUESTIONS
 1.  C Enzymes ar e biological catalysts that affect the kinetics of biological r eactions. B y lo wer-
ing the energy of the transition state, enzymes decr ease the Ea of biological r eactions and 
increase the amount of product formed per unit time (choice C is corr ect). ΔG is a thermo-
dynamic quantity and will be unaffected by the addition of an enzyme (choices B and D are 
wrong). The total amount of product formed once the r eaction has reached equilibrium is 
determined by thermodynamic factors, wher eas the amount of pr oduct formed in a giv en 
time period is determined by kinetic factors (choice A is wrong). 
 2. D Given that the question stem indicates that the reaction is unfavorable under standard con-
ditions, it is likely to proceed in the reverse direction under standard conditions. NADH 
loses a h ydrogen atom in forming NAD+ in t he reverse reaction a nd is t hereby oxidized 
(choice D is correct). Both C4H6O5 and NAD+ are more likely to be the product, rather 
than the reactant, of this redox reaction under standard conditions (choices A a nd B a re 
wrong). Because C4H4O5 gains hydrogen atoms in generating C4H6O5, it is reduced, not 
oxidized (choice C is wrong).  
 3.  B Since all of the items appear in exactly two answer choices, start by evaluating the shortest 
item, Item III. Item III is NOT an oxidation reduction reaction and is a c orrect response. 
This reaction simply splits C 6H14O12P2 into t wo, t hree-carbon phosphorylated molecules, 
while maintaining the O to H ratio (choices A and C can be eliminated). Since Item II does 
not appear in any of the remaining choices, it must be an oxidation-reduction reaction (i.e., 
it is a f alse statement) and you can evaluate Item I. Item I i s an oxidation-reduction reac-
tion and is a false statement: NAD+ gains a hydrogen atom and is reduced to NADH, and 
C3H7O6P must therefore be oxidized (choice D can be eliminated and choice B is correct). 
Note that Item II is in fact an oxidation-reduction reaction (a false statement): O2 is in its 
standard state, giving it a zero oxidation state. It is reduced to have a –2 oxidation state in 
the products. The O to H ratio is substantially increased in generating CO2 from C6H12O6, 
which indicates C6H12O6 has been oxidized.  
 4.  A The substitution of a positively charged lysine for a neutral isoleucine would help stabilize 
Glu in its deprotonated, negatively-charged state (choices B a nd D c an be eliminated). Be-
cause it would be more stable, it is more likely to give up its proton (i.e., it becomes more 
acidic), and the pKa would decrease (choice C is wrong, and choice A is correct).  
 5.  C pKa is a measure of acid strength. The lower the pKa, the more acidic the functional group. 
The question, however, is a sking about ba sicity. L ogically, t he more acidic t he f unctional 
group, the less basic it is. Therefore, the most basic group is the one with the highest pKa, 
and the least basic is the one with lowest pKa. Of the three amino acids, the side chain of 
Lys has the highest pKa (choices A and D can be eliminated), and the side chain of Glu has 
the lowest pKa (choice B can be eliminated, and choice C is correct).
 6. C When you hold your breath, the CO2 concentration in your blood increases. The increase 
in CO2 will increase the formation of carbonic acid, H2CO3, in your blood, which will de-
crease the pH (choice C is correct; choices A, B, and D are wrong).

MCAT BIOCHEMISTRY REVIEW
3.  Biochemistry Basics  | 59
SOLUTIONS TO CHAPTER 3 PRACTICE PASSAGE 
 1. D In its protonated form, the distal imidazole forms a h ydrogen bond with the oxygen mol-
ecule, stabilizing its position with respect to the iron. Introducing a n onpolar amino acid 
residue i n p lace o f t his i midazole w ould r emove t he h ydrogen b ond, d estabilizing t he  
interaction between iron and oxygen (choices A and B are wrong). If the interaction  
between iron and oxygen is destabilized, this would likely result in an increase in the rate at 
which oxygen dissociates from heme (choice D is correct, and choice C is wrong). 
 2. B Highlight the word NOT and write “A B C D ” on the noteboard. Evaluate each answer 
choice, writing “Y” if it is a hydrophobic amino acid that would be found in the pocket, or 
“N” if it is not; then choose the answer that stands out. F is phenylalanine, a hydrophobic 
amino acid (write “Y” next to “A” on the noteboard). Y is tyrosine, a polar amino acid (write 
“N” next to “B” on the noteboard). L i s leucine and V i s valine, both hydrophobic amino 
acids (write “Y” next to “C” and “D” on the noteboard). Since choice B stands out with an 
“N” instead of a “Y,” it is the correct answer choice.
 3.  A Increasing the acidity of the buffer in which hemoglobin is suspended would effectively de-
crease the basicity of the proximal imidazole by maximizing the chance that H+ will remain 
bound to the five-member ring. As a result, the proximal imidazole would exert less strain 
on the deoxygenated state of hemoglobin (choices C and D can be eliminated). According 
to the passage, increased basicity of the proximal imidazole would increase the affinity of 
the heme for oxygen; therefore, decreased basicity would decrease the affinity for oxygen 
(choice B c an be eliminated, a nd c hoice A i s c orrect). Indeed, while t here a re numerous  
effects of increasing acidity (decreasing pH) on the heme molecule, the commonly depicted 
oxygen dissociation curve below demonstrates a r elative decrease in heme affinity for oxy-
gen with increasing acidity; higher pO2 is required for the same oxyhemoglobin saturation. 
% Hb saturation by O2
O2 partial pressure (mm Hg)
Increased H+
Increased CO2
Increased temperature
100
50
10
20 6040 80 100 120 140
20
30
40
60
70
80
90
Decreased H+
Decreased CO2
Decreased temperature
Normal conditions
